[DOCS] Adds what's new for 8.1 (#126272)
elastic/kibana: docs/user/whats-new.asciidoc

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-canvas-filter.png[Filter panel in Canvas]

[float]
=== Visualizations

[float]
==== Combine fields with drag and drop

Combine multiple fields with drag and drop to see top combinations in Lens.
Use this feature to determine which combinations contribute to your metrics’ performance.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-lens-combine.gif[Drag to combin in Lens]

[float]
==== Top values by rarity

When looking for root cause, it is often useful to find rare values in your data.
Do this in Lens by seeing top values by rarity.
This takes advantage of the {es} rare terms aggregation and makes it easy to ask
“What’s not normal here?”

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-lens-rarity.png[Rank by rarity in top values in Lens, width=50%]

[float]
==== Horizontal and vertical gauges

The gauge visualization adds extra context to your metrics.
Show minimum and maximum values dynamically by using a quick function or custom formula,
or set a static value for known metric ranges. Include a goal value to see
if a metric is above or below the goal. Set color bands to show ranges visually&mdash;imilar

> to reference lines in bar, line, and area visualizations. This new gauge visualization is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to reference lines in bar, line, and area visualizations. The gauge visualization is
```

in technical preview in 8.1.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-lens-guage.png[Example horizontal gauge with target value in Lens, width=50%]

[float]
==== Mosaic visualization

The mosaic visualization, also known as marimekko or mekko, allows for side-by-side
comparison of two dimensions against a single metric. Treemaps and two-layered
pies do this as well, but the mosaic can be more effective for visual comparisons
by aligning the colors for the term side by side. Try this on low cardinality
dimensions to see its strengths. This new mosaic visualization is in technical preview in 8.1.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-lens-mosaic.png[Example mosaic visualization in Lens]

[float]
==== Waffle visualization

> The waffle visualization is a proportion visualization that makes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create proportional waffle visualizations that make
```

more efficient use of space than pie charts.
Waffles are designed for square spaces, which aligns well with how

> most dashboards are authored. Waffles are stronger for low cardinality breakdowns,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most dashboards are created. Since waffles display the data in 1% blocks, they are best for low cardinality breakdowns, and are not recommended for small partitions. 
```

> but are not recommended for very small partitions because they only can show

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> data in 1% blocks. You might be surprised how small you can make a waffle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might be surprised how small you can make a waffle
```

> visualization and maintain readability. This new waffle visualization is in technical preview in 8.1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
visualization and maintain readability. The waffle visualization is in technical preview in 8.1.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-lens-waffle.png[Example waffle visualization in Lens, width=50%]

[float]
==== Color by value in metrics

> Color the metric text or the background of the entire visualization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply color to the text and background of metric visualizations 
```

> based on the value of the metric. Set up color stops for multiple colors similar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
based on the value of the metric. Set up color stops for multiple colors, similar
```

> to what you can do in Lens tables, heatmaps, and the new gauge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to what you can do in *Lens* tables, heatmaps, and gauge.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-lens-metric.png[Metric color options in Lens, width=75%]

[float]

> ==== Table sort on dashboard view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Sort tables in dashboard view mode
```

> Allow dashboard viewers to quickly change a table’s sort on the fly, like the editors can.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now enable users with view-only dashboard privileges to sort data tables on the fly, similar to the existing visualization editor behavior.
```

[float]
==== Filter formulas globally

> This brings the familiar “Filter by” option for metrics defined by a formula.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bring the familiar *Filter by* option for metrics defined by a formula.
```

> With this feature it’s easy to filter all the parts of your formula with KQL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Filter each part of your formula with KQL
```

> without having to copy or paste the KQL to all the aggregations used in the formula.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without copying or pasting to all the aggregations in the formula.
```

[float]
==== Configurable donut visualizations

> The inner area size (or “donut hole”) in the donut

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inner area size (or donut hole) in the donut
```

visualization is now configurable&mdash;keeping the default as a smaller size to maximize space for

> labels but allowing you to change the option in Lens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
labels, but allowing you to change the option in *Lens*.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/highlights-lens-donut.png[Inner area size setting in Lens donuts,width=75%]

[float]

> ==== Collapsable suggestions panel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Collapsable Suggestions panel
```

> Get back some vertical space in Lens and save on the query cost of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get back some vertical space in *Lens* and save on the query cost of
```

> suggestions by collapsing the suggestions panel. {kib} will remember if you close

Reviewer: ```suggestion
suggestions by collapsing the *Suggestions* panel. {kib} remembers when you collapse
```

your suggestions the next time you use the editor with the same browser.

[float]
==== Improved color controls

> Revised color stop editing experience offers a more streamlined way to specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The revised color stop editing experience offers a more streamlined way to specify
```

what happens outside of the defined ranges (above and below the minimum and maximum).
These revised controls also add the ability to easily distribute color stops

> evenly in one click. Look for this in Lens tables, heatmaps, metrics (new this release),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
evenly in one click. Look for the new functionality in *Lens* tables, heatmaps, metrics,
```

> and gauges (new this release).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and gauges.
```
